---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Journey of a To Do List App"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2024-07-28
published: true
labels:
  - Coding
---

The journey of developing a To-Do List console application has been an enlightening experience, significantly enhancing my programming skills and understanding of software development. This essay recounts the progress made from week 1 through week 5, detailing the challenges faced, solutions implemented, and knowledge gained. As an aspiring IT professional, this project has provided a practical platform to apply theoretical concepts learned in class and develop a functional application that meets user needs.  

In the first week, I focused on planning the project and setting up the initial development environment. The primary objective was to create a simple task management application using C# as the programming language. I began by outlining the basic features required for the application: adding tasks, viewing tasks, marking tasks as complete or incomplete, and deleting tasks. I then set up the development environment by installing the necessary plug-ins and choosing Visual Studio as the integrated development environment. This initial phase involved familiarizing myself with the tools and ensuring all necessary components were in place for coding.  

During the second week, I delved into writing the core functionality of the application by developing a single class that encompassed both task representation and user interaction. This unified class included properties for the task ID, title, and completion status, and methods for handling user inputs. Creating this all-encompassing class required significant effort, as it involved building a menu system and implementing methods for adding, viewing, completing, and deleting tasks. By the end of the week, I had a working prototype that allowed users to manage their tasks through a basic but functional interface. 

Week 3 was dedicated to refining the application’s features and incorporating robust error handling. I focused on ensuring that the application could handle various edge cases, such as invalid input and attempts to modify non-existent tasks. This involved enhancing the methods in the class to include checks for valid input and providing informative feedback to users. Additionally, I improved the user interface by making the menu system more intuitive and ensuring that task details were displayed clearly. These refinements made the application more reliable.  

In the fourth week, I concentrated on testing the application thoroughly and optimizing the code. I conducted extensive tests to verify that all features worked as intended and that the application handled errors gracefully. This involved running the application through various scenarios and documenting any issues encountered. Through this testing process, I identified and fixed several bugs, particularly related to input validation and task management. Optimization efforts focused on cleaning up the code, removing redundancies, and improving efficiency. These steps were crucial in ensuring that the application was stable and performed well.  

The final week was dedicated to adding the finishing touches and reflecting on the entire development process. I reviewed the project to ensure all requirements were met and the application was ready for submission. Reflecting on the journey, I realized the significant progress made in both technical skills and project management. The experience taught me the importance of planning, iterative development, and thorough testing. It also highlighted the value of continuous improvement in software development.  

Developing the To-Do List console application has been a rewarding experience that provided valuable insights into the software development process. From initial planning and coding to testing and optimization, each phase offered unique challenges and learning opportunities. This project not only enhanced my programming skills but also reinforced the importance of meticulous planning, robust error handling, and thorough testing. 
